packages/kart/README.md, before:

# Kart wrapper

## Table of Contents

- [Bundle and Build](#bundle-and-build)
- [Clone cli](#clone-cli)
- [Diff cli](#diff-cli)
- [Export cli](#export-cli)
- [PR Comment cli](#pr-comment-cli)
- [Version cli](#version-cli)
- [Sample GitHub Actions Workflow](#sample-github-actions-workflow)

## Bundle and Build

Bundle the package before building the docker image. Run both commands at root directory.

```
npx lerna run bundle --stream
docker build -f packages/kart/Dockerfile -t kart .
```

## Clone cli

Pass the GITHUB_TOKEN env variable and mount a local folder to clone a kart repo.

```
docker run -it --rm -e GITHUB_TOKEN="GITHUB_TOKEN" -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart clone linz/topographic-data
```

**Clone specific branch or commit:**
```
docker run -it --rm -e GITHUB_TOKEN="GITHUB_TOKEN" -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart clone linz/topographic-data --ref feature-branch
```

## Diff cli

Run diff commands on a cloned kart repository to compare changes between commits or branches.

**Default diff (master..FETCH_HEAD):**
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart diff
```

**Custom diff range:**
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart diff commit1..commit2
```

## Export cli

Mount a local folder containing the cloned repo to export geopackage.
When no arguments are provided, this will export all datasets from the cloned repository.

**All datasets:**
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart export
```

**Specific dataset(s):**
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart export marine airport
```

**Export from specific commit:**
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart export --ref commit-sha
```

## PR Comment cli

Add or update a pull request comment with diff results.

**Auto-detect PR and repo:**
```
docker run -it --rm -e GITHUB_TOKEN="GITHUB_TOKEN" -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart pr-comment
```

**Specify PR number and repo:**
```
docker run -it --rm -e GITHUB_TOKEN="GITHUB_TOKEN" -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart pr-comment --pr 123 --repo linz/topographic-data
```

**Custom comment body file:**
```
docker run -it --rm -e GITHUB_TOKEN="GITHUB_TOKEN" -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart pr-comment custom_summary.md
```

## Version cli

Output the kart version.
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart version
```

## Sample GitHub Actions Workflow

Here's a complete example of how to use the kart CLI commands in a GitHub Actions workflow for pull request checks:

```yaml
name: pr-checks

on: pull_request

jobs:
  diff-qc-export:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    container:
      image: ghcr.io/linz/topographic-system/kart

    steps:
      - name: Check kart version
        run: node /scripts/index.js version

      - name: Clone repository
        run: node /scripts/index.js clone ${{ github.event.repository.clone_url }} --ref ${{ github.head_ref }}
        env:
          GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}

      - name: Generate diff
        run: node /scripts/index.js diff

      - name: Comment on PR
        run: node /scripts/index.js pr-comment
        env:
          GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}

      - name: Upload diff artifacts
        uses: actions/upload-artifact@v4
        with:
          name: diff
          path: |
            pr_summary.md
            diff/

      - name: Export datasets
        run: node /scripts/index.js export
```

This workflow will:
1. Check the kart version for debugging
2. Clone the repository with the PR branch
3. Generate a diff comparing the PR changes against master
4. Post a comment on the PR with the diff results
5. Export all datasets as geopackages

The workflow runs on every pull request and provides automated quality checks and diff visualization for topographic data changes.

Commit message:

feat(kart): create geoparquet files from kart gpkg export BM-1480 (#33)
### Motivation

As the owner of data in the topographic-data repository
I want every version (merged PR / release) exported to S3 as GeoParquet
with simple STAC-compliant metadata (dataset name + absolute or relative
location)
so that each version is archived, discoverable, and accessible for
downstream users.

### Modifications

Added `to-parquet` command.

### Verification

Manual gh action and local runs.

packages/kart/README.md, after:

# Kart wrapper

## Table of Contents

- [Bundle and Build](#bundle-and-build)
- [Clone cli](#clone-cli)
- [Diff cli](#diff-cli)
- [Export cli](#export-cli)
- [To Parquet cli](#to-parquet-cli)
- [PR Comment cli](#pr-comment-cli)
- [Version cli](#version-cli)
- [Sample GitHub Actions Workflow](#sample-github-actions-workflow)

## Bundle and Build

Bundle the package before building the docker image. Run both commands at root directory.

```
npx lerna run bundle --stream
docker build -f packages/kart/Dockerfile -t kart .
```

## Clone cli

Pass the GITHUB_TOKEN env variable and mount a local folder to clone a kart repo.

```
docker run -it --rm -e GITHUB_TOKEN="GITHUB_TOKEN" -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart clone linz/topographic-data
```

**Clone specific branch or commit:**
```
docker run -it --rm -e GITHUB_TOKEN="GITHUB_TOKEN" -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart clone linz/topographic-data --ref feature-branch
```

## Diff cli

Run diff commands on a cloned kart repository to compare changes between commits or branches.

**Default diff (master..FETCH_HEAD):**
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart diff
```

**Custom diff range:**
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart diff commit1..commit2
```

## Export cli

Mount a local folder containing the cloned repo to export geopackage.
When no arguments are provided, this will export all datasets from the cloned repository.

**All datasets:**
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart export
```

**Only datasets with changes:**
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart export --changed-datasets-only
```

**Specific dataset(s):**
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart export marine airport
```

**Export from specific commit:**
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart export --ref commit-sha
```

## To Parquet cli

Convert .gpkg files to geoparquet.
When no arguments are provided, this will convert all datasets from the `./export` folder.
Output parquet files will be saved to `./parquet` folder.

**All datasets:**
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart to-parquet
```

**Specific dataset(s):**
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart to-parquet export/marine.gpkg export/airport.gpkg
```

## PR Comment cli

Add or update a pull request comment with diff results.

**Auto-detect PR and repo:**
```
docker run -it --rm -e GITHUB_TOKEN="GITHUB_TOKEN" -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart pr-comment
```

**Specify PR number and repo:**
```
docker run -it --rm -e GITHUB_TOKEN="GITHUB_TOKEN" -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart pr-comment --pr 123 --repo linz/topographic-data
```

**Custom comment body file:**
```
docker run -it --rm -e GITHUB_TOKEN="GITHUB_TOKEN" -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart pr-comment custom_summary.md
```

## Version cli

Output the kart version.
```
docker run -it --rm -v /tmp/docker:/tmp kart version
```

## Sample GitHub Actions Workflow

Here's a complete example of how to use the kart CLI commands in a GitHub Actions workflow for pull request checks:

```yaml
name: pr-checks

on: pull_request

jobs:
  diff-qc-export:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    container:
      image: ghcr.io/linz/topographic-system/kart

    steps:
      - name: Check kart version
        run: node /scripts/index.js version

      - name: Clone repository
        run: node /scripts/index.js clone ${{ github.event.repository.clone_url }} --ref ${{ github.head_ref }}
        env:
          GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}

      - name: Generate diff
        run: node /scripts/index.js diff

      - name: Comment on PR
        run: node /scripts/index.js pr-comment
        env:
          GITHUB_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.GITHUB_TOKEN }}

      - name: Upload diff artifacts
        uses: actions/upload-artifact@v5
        with:
          name: diff
          path: |
            pr_summary.md
            diff/

      - name: Export datasets
        run: node /scripts/index.js export --changed-datasets-only
```

This workflow will:
1. Check the kart version for debugging
2. Clone the repository with the PR branch
3. Generate a diff comparing the PR changes against master
4. Post a comment on the PR with the diff results
5. Export all datasets with changes as geopackages
6. Convert all geopackages to parquet files

The workflow runs on every pull request and provides automated quality checks and diff visualization for topographic data changes.
